We've already discussed setting up your folder structure and discussed how to name your files, but what types of files are used by and produced by R? We haven't formalized exactly what all the different types of data are in R or how to access them. We'll discuss all of that in this lesson. 

Before discussing further details about each type of file, we'll point out that the file extension, what comes after the dot in the file name, specifies what type of file you're working with. While the extension matters, meaning that dot R is different than dot R m d, capitalization does not matter for file extensions. A dot lowercase r file is the same as a dot capital R file. Just something to keep in mind as you start working with these types of files. That said, while the computer will know what type of file it is regardless of capitalization, when you're writing code, capitalization matters a lot. If you try to read in a file named script dot lowercase r but accidentally specify script dot capital r, your code won't be able to find the file. We mention this now so that as you start saving files you save files using consistent capitalization. The capitalization we use throughout this lesson is the capitalization we recommend. We summarize this capitalization here before walking through each one.

The most basic file type in R uses the dot R file extension. R Script files contain code written in the R programming language. As you want to write R code and save this code, you'll save it as a dot R file.  To get started writing an R Script file, you'll go to R Studio and navigate to File, New File, R Script along the menu at the top. This will open up a blank R Script file.

In this R Script is where you would write R code. As you write code, you'll want to save this file. Here, in this example, you can see the R code we've written and that this file has been saved as script underscore test dot capital R.

We've also introduced R Markdown files previously. As a refresher, R Markdown documents use Markdown syntax and include code chunks with R code that will be run when the document is "Knit" into its final format. To get started writing an R Markdown document, you'll go to File, New File, R Markdown. After filling out the information in the pop-up window and clicking OK, an R Markdown document will open up. 

In this document you'll use Markdown syntax outside of code chunks and R code in the code chunks to generate your reports. R Markdown documents are great at producing reproducible reports that walk people through your data science process from start to finish.

As you write R code in a dot R file, you will inevitably create objects. For example, in the code you see here, m p g is an object created by this code that contains the data from the m p g column of the m t cars data frame and c y l is an object contained the c y l column from the m t cars data frame. 

If I were to run these two lines of code, they would show up in the Console, and the objects m p g and c y l would now be visible in the Environment tab. 

Often, you'll create objects that you won't need to save. However, from time to time you'll make changes to a data frame or generate an object that you'll want to use later. To save an object and use it later, you can save it as an R data file. These files contain objects that can be saved directly from and read directly into R using the commands save and load. And, in particular, R data files can save multiple objects. To save the two objects m p g and c y l into an R Data file, you would use the save function with the syntax you see here. The syntax for save requires you to specify the objects you want to save, separated by commas. Then, the filename you want this R data file to have is specified using the file argument. When this line of code is run, the specified file appears in the Files tab within R Studio, demonstrating that this file has been created.

If in the future, if you were to want to load the objects m p g and c y l back into your R session, you would do this using the load function. To do that here, we'll first have to remove these objects from R Studio. To accomplish this, click on the broom in the Environment tab of R Studio.  

After clicking "Yes" to confirm that you want to remove all objects, 

you'll see that m p g and c y l are no longer in your R Studio environment. They have been removed from R Studio.

To load them back in from m t cars underscore objects dot r d a, you would  use the load function you see here. Note that you need to put quotes around the filename to specify that this is a file and not an object in R. A second note is a reminder about file paths. Here, the file we want is in the directory we're working in. If that were not the case, you would have to specify the path to the file within the quotation marks. When you run this line of code, you'll see that c y l and m p g are once again available objects in your R Studio Environment tab! To recap, when you want to save multiple objects to be read in at a later time, you'll save them as an R data file. R Data files are generated using the save function and read into R using the load command.

Serialized R object files are similar to R data files with the exception that they can only save a single R object at a time. When you only want to save a single object, these files are the best option. To save a serialized R object file, you'll use the function save R D S.  .  To read a serialized object file into R, you'll use the function read R D S. . For example, to save the m p g object you would use the code you see here. This will generate the file m p g dot r d s. 

To read this file back in, we'll first remove all objects from R Studio using the broom icon in the Environment tab and will then use the read R D S function.

Unlike with dot r d a objects, when you read a dot r d s object back in, to make the object available, you use the function read R D S and you have to assign the object a variable name. Otherwise, the contents of the object will just print to your Console. This is helpful because it doesn't matter what the name of the object was when you saved it. As long as you know the filename, you can pick a new object name. Here, we assign the serialized R object file to m p g, but we could have chosen a different object name.

R Projects are incredibly helpful files. In their simplest form, by working within an R Project and saving a dot R proj file, you are always able to pick back up on a project from where you left off. When you return to a project, your R project file will start a new R session, load the dot R Data file in your project's main directory if there is one, load the dot R history file into the R Studio History tab, set the current working directory to the project directory, make previously edited documents available in the Files tab, and restore R Studio settings to what they were the last time the project was closed. This allows you to pick back up from where you left off! Then, when you leave to work on a different project, your dot R Data will be saved and your dot R proj file updated so that you can pick up from where you left off the next time you open the project!

Now that we've covered the main types of R files you'll be working with and generating in R Studio, we'll move on to formally discussing the datasets available within R. . You've previously seen and worked with datasets that are available to you in R. . Specifically, you've seen examples that used the iris and m t cars datasets in previous lessons. However, we haven't covered how to find all available datasets that are included in R automatically, so we'll do that now. To access a list of all the available datasets within R, you'll use the data function in your Console. This will open up a file called "R data sets". You can scroll through this list to get a sense of what data sets are available. The name of the data set is in the first column while a brief description of the dataset is in the second column. 

If one of these datasets looks interesting to you, say for example the "Orange" dataset, you can get more detailed information about the dataset by using the help function in R, using a question mark before the dataset. This opens up an explanation in the Help tab of R Studio. Here, you can see a description of the dataset and can scroll to see what variables are included in this dataset. Finally, at the bottom of the Help window, you'll see examples of how to work with the dataset!

In addition to the datasets available by default to you in R, many packages also contain datasets that you can use. To see a list of what datasets are available from a specific package, you can again use the data function, but you'll want to specify the name of the package using the package argument. For example, to see a list of the datasets available from the g g plot 2 package, you would want to use the code you see here. As before, this function will open up a list of the available datasets within that package. 

In order to use any of these datasets, however, you'll have to load the package using the library function. After loading the package, you can then access the Help pages for a dataset, as previously, using question mark as you see here. 

In addition to datasets included automatically in R Studio and those that are in R packages, there are lots of other types of data that can be read into R. . This could be data from a Google Sheet or an Excel spreadsheet or data from a website. In the lessons in the next course we'll discuss a number of other types of files and master how to get them into R, so just know that's coming up! In the lessons covered in the next week of this class, we'll discuss how to get various files from different sources loaded into R. .  In this lesson we've covered the main file formats that are used within R. Make sure you're comfortable with what the various file extensions mean and in what scenarios you would use the different file extensions. Additionally, we discussed how to access datasets that are available by default in R Studio as well as those that are available through specific R packages. You already have so much data at you fingertips, and we're just getting started!