In R, categorical data are handled as factors. 

By definition, categorical data are limited in that they have a set number of possible values they can take. For example, there are 12 months in a calendar year. In a month variable, each observation is limited to taking one of these twelve values. Thus, with a limited number of possible values, month is a categorical variable. Categorical data, which will be referred to as factors for the rest of this lesson, are regularly found in data. Learning how to work with this type of variable effectively will be incredibly helpful.

To make working with factors simpler, we'll utilize the four cats package. Similar to the string R package, all functions within four cats begin with F C T underscore. 

As before, to see available functions you can type question mark F C T underscore in your R Studio console. A drop-down menu will appear with all the possible four cats functions. Before working through this lesson, you'll want to be sure that four cats has been installed and loaded in.

In R, factors are comprised of two components: the actual values of the data and the possible levels within the factor. Thus, to create a factor, you need to supply both these pieces of information. For example, if we were to create a character vector of the twelve months, we could assign each of the months to a vector called "all months" - this will eventually become our factor levels. Then we can supply a few of the month names to a new vector called some months, which will be our values, which will become factorized later. However, if we were to sort this vector, R would sort this vector alphabetically. 

While you and I know that this is not how months should be ordered, we haven't yet told R that. To do so, we need to let R know that some months should be a factor variable, using the factor function, and what the levels of that factor variable should be, specifying it within factor as levels equals all months. So we create a new object containing the some months data, but specifying the factors as those in all months. Even though not all twelve months are included in the some months object, we've stated that all of the months are possible values. In comparing the data before and after this factorization, we can see that our new object is factored and contains 12 levels, one for each month. Now when we sort the factored dataset, it is in the order we specified in all months! If you ever need to check what levels are assigned to a factor, you can use the levels function. 

What if you wanted your months to start with July first? That can be accomplished using F C T relevel. To use this function, you simply need to state what you'd like to relevel (month factored) followed by the levels you want to relevel. If you want these to be placed in the beginning, the after argument should be after equals 0. You can play around with this setting to see how changing after affects the levels in your output. After re-leveling, when we sort this factor, we see that July is placed first, as specified by the level re-ordering.

Another way of ordering your data is to keep it in the order you originally specified. In our case, "March", "December", "January",  "April", then "July". To do this, you simply use F C T in order. After using this function, we see that even when we sort the output, it does not sort the factor alphabetically, nor does it put it in calendar order. In fact, it stays in the same order as the input, just as we specified.

For the remainder of this lesson, we're going to return to using a dataset that's in R by default. We'll use the chick weights dataset for exploring the remaining advanced functions. This data set includes data from an experiment that was looking to compare the "effectiveness of various feed supplements on the growth rate of chickens."

To re-order factor levels by frequency of the value in the dataset, you'll want to use F C T in freq. Below, we see from the output from table that 'soybean' is the most frequent feed in the data set while 'horsebean' is the least frequent. Thus, when we order by frequency, we can expect these two feeds to be at opposite ends for our levels. As expected, soybean, the most frequent level, appears as the first level and horsebean, the least frequent level, appears last with the rest of the levels in between, sorted by their frequency. 

If we wanted to sort the levels from least frequent to most frequent, we could just add F C T rev to the code using a pipe to reverse the factor level order.

At times you may want to reorder levels of a factor by another variable in your dataset. This is often helpful when generating plots. To do this you specify the variable you want to reorder, followed by the numeric variable by which you'd like the factor to be re-leveled. Here, we see that we're re-leveling feed by the weight of the chickens.  While we haven't discussed plotting in detail yet, the best way to demonstrate how this works is by plotting the feed against the weights. We can see that the order of the factor is such that those chickens with the lowest median weight (horsebean) are to the left, while those with the highest median weight (casein) are to the right. To order our feed factor by the weight, we use mutate and F C T reorder to reorder the feed types by chicken weight, then we use G G Plot 2 to Plot the feed type on the X and chicken weights on the Y axes and finally specify that we want to plot this data as points. 

To demonstrate how to combine several factor levels into a single level, we'll continue to use our 'chick weights' dataset. Let's assume (even if it doesn't make good sense with regards to chicken feed) you wanted to combine all the feeds with the name "bean" in it to a single category and you wanted to combine "linseed" and "sunflower" into the category "seed". This can be simply accomplished with F C T recode. In fact, below, you see we can rename all the levels to a simpler term (the values on the left side of the equals sign) by re-naming the original level names (the right side of the equals sign). This code will create a new column, called feed recode (accomplished with mutate). This new column will combine "horsebean" and "soybean feeds", grouping them both into the larger level "bean". It will similarly group "sunflower" and "linseed" into the larger level "seed." All other feed types will also be renamed. When we look at the summary of this new column by using table, we see that all of the feeds have been recoded, just as we specified! We now have four different feed types, rather than the original six.

Finally, when working with factors, there are times when you want to convert a numeric variable into a factor. For example, if you were talking about a dataset with BMI for a number of individuals, you may want to categorize people based on whether or not they are underweight (BMI less than 18.5), of a healthy weight (BMI between 18.5 and 29.9), or obese (BMI greater than or equal to 30). When you want to take a numeric variable and turn it into a categorical factor variable, you can accomplish this easily by using if else statements. Here we combine those two ideas. Within a single statement we provide R with a condition: weight less than or equal to 200. With this, we are stating that the condition is if a chicken's weight is less than or equal to 200 grams. Then, if that condition is true, meaning if a chicken's weight is less than or equal to 200 grams, let's assign that chicken to the category low. Otherwise, and this is the else part of the if else function, assign that chicken to the category high. Finally, we have to let R know that weight recode is a factor variable, so we call factor on this new column. This way we take a numeric variable (weight), and turn it into a factor variable (weight recode). 

This lesson has covered how to work with factors (categorical) variables in R using the four cats package in R. In line with the previous few lessons, the best way to learn how to work with factors, is to actually work with factors. Play around with the examples here and continue to practice using this type of variable! You'll come across factors regularly as you analyze data!